.Dd June 1, 2026
.Dt ZIKH 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zikh
.Nd non-destructive photo organizer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm plan
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl \-json
.Ar source dest
.Nm
.Cm execute
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl \-json
.Ar source dest
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
discovers photos in
.Ar source ,
extracts capture timestamps from embedded EXIF metadata,
and moves them into a date-organized hierarchy under
.Ar dest .
.Pp
Processing runs in five phases:
discovery, metadata extraction, planning, validation, and execution.
The first four phases make no filesystem changes.
No file is moved or deleted until the complete plan has been validated.
.Pp
.Ar source
is traversed recursively.
Symbolic links are not followed and not collected.
.Ar dest
need not exist before
.Cm execute
is run; it is created on demand.
.Pp
The following invariants hold across all runs:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
No existing file at a destination path is overwritten or deleted.
.It
Source files are removed only after their destination is confirmed written.
.It
EXIF metadata is never written back to files.
.It
Running
.Nm
a second time after a successful first run produces no changes.
.El
.Pp
Supported extensions:
.Li .jpg ,
.Li .jpeg ,
.Li .heic ,
.Li .png ,
.Li .tiff ,
.Li .tif .
Extension matching is case-insensitive.
Files with other extensions are skipped without error.
.Pp
The destination filesystem must support
.Xr link 2 .
Filesystems without hardlink support, such as FAT and exFAT,
are not supported as destinations.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width execute
.It Cm plan
Run phases one through four.
Print all planned operations to stdout.
Make no filesystem changes.
.It Cm execute
Run all five phases.
Apply the plan.
Print a summary to stderr on completion.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--json"
.It Fl v
Under
.Cm plan ,
print the full per-file operation list after the summary and histogram.
Under
.Cm execute ,
print each operation to stderr as it executes.
Without this flag,
.Cm plan
shows the summary and year histogram only.
.It Fl \-json
Write NDJSON to stdout instead of human-readable output.
One line per operation, followed by a summary line.
See
.Sx OUTPUT
for the record format.
Mutually exclusive with
.Fl v .
.It Fl \-help
Print usage and exit 0.
.El
.Sh DESTINATION NAMING
Files with a valid capture timestamp are placed at:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dest/YYYY/MM/YYYY-MM-DD_HH-MM-SS_BASENAME.EXT
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy YYYY ,
.Sy MM ,
.Sy DD ,
.Sy HH ,
.Sy MM ,
.Sy SS
are the year, month, day, hour, minute, and second from the capture timestamp,
zero-padded.
.Sy BASENAME
is the original filename stem, preserved byte-for-byte.
.Sy EXT
is the original extension, case-preserved.
.Pp
Files without a usable timestamp are placed at:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dest/unparsed/ORIGINAL_FILENAME
.Ed
.Pp
The original filename is used in full because there is no timestamp
to construct a meaningful name.
.Ss Timestamp selection
The capture timestamp is read from EXIF tag
.Sy DateTimeOriginal
if present and valid.
If absent or invalid,
.Sy CreateDate
is used as a fallback.
If neither is present or valid, the file is treated as unparsed.
.Pp
The required format is
.Li YYYY:MM:DD HH:MM:SS
exactly: date components separated by colons, date and time separated by a space,
no timezone suffix.
Year must be no less than 1970.
Month must be in the range 1 to 12.
Day must be in the range 1 to 31.
Any deviation from this format is treated as absent.
.Ss Collision resolution
When two files would produce the same destination path, or when the computed
destination already exists on disk,
.Nm
appends
.Sy \-N
between the filename stem and extension, where
.Sy N
starts at 1 and increments:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
2024-06-15_14-32-08_IMG_0001.jpg
2024-06-15_14-32-08_IMG_0001-1.jpg
2024-06-15_14-32-08_IMG_0001-2.jpg
.Ed
.Pp
When multiple source files map to the same destination, suffixes are assigned
in ascending lexicographic order of their absolute source paths.
The file sorting first receives the base name without a suffix.
This ordering is deterministic: identical input always produces identical output.
.Pp
Duplicate detection is not performed.
Two files with identical content but different source paths are treated as
distinct files.
.Sh OUTPUT
.Ss Human-readable
Under
.Cm plan ,
the summary line and year histogram are written to stdout.
With
.Fl v ,
the full per-file operation list follows the histogram.
Under
.Cm execute
with
.Fl v ,
one line per operation is written to stderr as each completes.
.Pp
Operation line format:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
MOVE     /source/IMG_1234.jpg \(-> /dest/2024/06/2024-06-15_14-32-08_IMG_1234.jpg
UNPARSED /source/scan.png \(-> /dest/unparsed/scan.png
SKIP     /source/video.mp4
ERROR    /source/bad.jpg  exiftool_failure: path contains newline
.Ed
.Pp
A summary line follows the operation list:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
plan: 1 move, 1 unparsed, 1 skip, 1 error
.Ed
.Pp
Under
.Cm execute
without
.Fl v ,
only the summary is printed to stderr:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zikh: processed 4 files
  moved:     1
  unparsed:  1
  skipped:   1
  errors:    1
.Ed
.Pp
ANSI colour is applied to terminal output when
.Ev NO_COLOR
is unset,
.Ev TERM
is set and not
.Dq dumb ,
and the output stream is a terminal.
Destination paths are shown in cyan.
Errors are shown in red.
Piping strips colour without any flag.
.Ss NDJSON
With
.Fl \-json ,
one JSON object per line is written to stdout.
.Pp
Under
.Cm plan :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"op":"move","source":"/src/a.jpg","dest":"/dst/2024/06/..."}
{"op":"unparsed","source":"/src/s.png","dest":"/dst/unparsed/s.png"}
{"op":"skip","source":"/src/v.mp4","reason":"unsupported_extension"}
{"op":"error","source":"/src/b.jpg","error":"exiftool_failure","detail":"..."}
{"summary":true,"moves":1,"unparsed":1,"skipped":1,"errors":1}
.Ed
.Pp
Under
.Cm execute ,
each operation record gains a
.Sy result
field and the summary gains a
.Sy processed
field:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"op":"move","source":"...","dest":"...","result":"ok"}
{"op":"error","source":"...","error":"filesystem_error","detail":"..."}
{"summary":true,"processed":4,"moved":1,"unparsed":1,"skipped":1,"errors":1}
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "NO_COLOR"
.It Ev NO_COLOR
Disable ANSI colour output.
Set to any value to take effect.
.It Ev TERM
Used to detect terminal capability for colour output.
Colour is disabled when unset, empty, or set to
.Dq dumb .
.It Ev TMPDIR
Directory for temporary files created during cross-device moves.
Defaults to
.Pa /tmp .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "dest/.zikh_tmp_XXXXXX"
.It Pa dest/*/.zikh_tmp_XXXXXX
Temporary file created during cross-device moves, in the destination
parent directory.
Deleted after the move completes.
On
.Sy SIGKILL
or hard crash, may be left in place and is safe to remove by prefix.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width "64"
.It 0
Success, or no files to process.
.It 1
Partial success: at least one operation failed and at least one succeeded.
.Cm execute
only.
.It 2
Planning or validation failure.
No filesystem changes were made.
.It 3
All operations failed.
.Cm execute
only.
.It 64
Bad command-line arguments.
.It 70
Internal error.
.It 71
Operating system error: unreadable directory or unreadable source file.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Preview what
.Nm
would do without making any changes:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zikh plan ~/Pictures ~/archive
.Ed
.Pp
Show the full per-file operation list:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zikh plan -v ~/Pictures ~/archive
.Ed
.Pp
Organize photos:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zikh execute ~/Pictures ~/archive
.Ed
.Pp
Show each move as it happens:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zikh execute -v ~/Pictures ~/archive
.Ed
.Pp
Find files that could not be timestamped:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zikh plan --json ~/Pictures ~/archive | grep '"op":"unparsed"'
.Ed
.Pp
Find errors in a planned run:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zikh plan --json ~/Pictures ~/archive | grep '"op":"error"'
.Ed
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Sergiy Duras Aq Mt sergiy@duras.org
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr link 2
